ex-presidents rarely endorsed in their
own party's presidential primaries but
it can feel a little different when one
candidate was that president's running
mate and it could feel even more
different as the race whittles down to
that running mate against one opponent
who isn't even a long-standing member of
the Democratic Party
now Obama did a famously high-powered
joint interview with Hillary Clinton in
her pre-primary period her allies
invoked it as kind of a tacit sign of
support the White House at the time
played that down but the practice
neutrality of President Obama is very
noticeable right now we're hearing from
Biden fans who would love Obama to just
jump in and say something great about
Biden right now in public even if he
doesn't formally endorse meanwhile
former Obama campaign manager David
Plouffe who is now an MSNBC analyst
recently told us that's exactly the
opposite of how Obama views his
influence and a public thumb on the
scale for Biden could only backfire as
well what carries that risk with Sanders
supporters demanding an even playing
field now that is the context for a new
Sanders campaign strategy unveiling this
ad featuring Obama and Sanders together
which raises questions about which
candidates get to invoke Obama's legacy
which Rachel actually raised in her
interview last night you have a new ad
out today featuring President Obama
praising you in the past is President
Obama part of the Democratic
establishment that you know you're
running I want to say something about
brocco bomb with somebody I'm not gonna
tell you he's my best friend
but I taught them every now and then ah
and I have a lot of respect for
Washington Democrats aren't really
buying this line from Sanders and they
argue that whatever he said is running
against the Democratic Party itself
includes running against its most recent
and most popular leader Sanders also
though did something else interesting
here he revealed a conversation he had
with the former president he said you
know what Bernie I'm not gonna get
involved
alright and he kept his word you may
have seen just the other day he said I
think Wyden had reached out to him and
wanted his support he said no I think I
will be more effective in supporting the
eventual winner not getting involved
early on I know that there's an enormous
pressure on him to support mine and the
fact that he's not
that makes me respect them even more not
getting involved early on it appears
Obama wasn't involved nearly on not
publicly but we want to show you lately
there are some clues Obama is getting
more involved and may meet the eye
authorizing allies to support Biden
through hidden handwork noting to some
that he sees Biden as the candidate to
back through intermediaries and then he
took the time to talk to Buddha judge
and discuss the potential Biden
endorsement in a way that we clearly
read as supportive without formally
telling Buddha judge what to do and then
Obama also speaking with Biden right
after he won South Carolina all of this
adds up to Obama being somewhat involved
while walking a subtle I for the fact
that Sanders and Biden are both
crediting Obama even as he does this and
still seeking his support there's just a
reinforcement of both Obama's deaf
political touch and the obvious goodwill
he retains in this Democratic Party
that's not automatic george w bush for
example found himself blasted in the
republican primaries of 2016 and obama
knows we all know we've seen it that in
some ways the base has moved to the left
of him on issue some issues anyway but
is this the approach right now or in a
two-person race with this party's most
consequential battle against donald
trump ahead is it time for obama to make
his views more publicly clear we take
that question right now to new york
times contributing writers Stephen
Phillips who found a democracy in color
which works on race and politics welcome
to the bead and what do you think yeah
no I don't think that he should be
putting his thumb on the scale and I
don't think it would be effective that
he's the leader of the parties the most
you know influential you know democratic
nominal people in the country and his
role is gonna be to unify the entire
party and really the entire part of the
country that wants to have a different
president get back on track and so for
him to come in too soon I think would
blunt his ultimate influence and I think
that that would not be a wise tactical
move so you're speaking to sort of how
he does it because everyone understands
Sanders alluded to the fact that he said
no he's known to prefer the person he
appointed his vice president over
someone who hasn't been in the party
here's that Sanders ad that's getting so
much attention take a look Bernie is
somebody who has the virtue of saying
exactly what he believes great
authenticity
[Applause]
I'm Bernie Sanders and I approve this
message feel the Bern you're not ya know
it that if it's amusing at some level
but it's great you know and I think that
it is important to recognize and I think
that something people have to come to
terms with is the generational
enthusiasm that's playing out in this
race and that the level of support that
Bernie is getting from younger voters
across all races is phenomenal and so it
would be not wise at all to be trying to
do anything that would alienate that
grouping prematurely at the same time
Biden doesn't really need Obama's
endorsement any that more than he
already has it that he was the vice
president of the first black president
of this country that fact sent a very
strong message to the voters in South
Carolina and all the african-american
voters across the South who have voted
who have now put Biden in first place he
doesn't need much more from Obama to
really be able to move this thing
forward yeah yeah when you put it like
that which is interesting because you
just put it if in a way more bluntly
than Joe Biden has you're saying an
endorsement is a one appearance the
daytime event the ultimate longer
endorsement was putting you a heartbeat
from the presidency the Barack Obama
also knows how to roast something people
may have forgotten I don't know if
you've seen him when he does his jokes a
lot of them work here he was having fun
with Bernie Sanders at a comedy
appearance in Washington take a look I
am hurt though Bernie that you've been
distancing yourself a little from me
I mean that's just not something that
you do to your comrade there is this
part of it I wonder and as my final
question you as a student of politics a
lot of Washington Democrats whether they
were right or wrong didn't take Sanders
seriously for a long time we've covered
on this show the serious support he has
a lot of people who believe in him and
his movement but that's the other
tension here and it goes both ways
because Sanders is now claiming he's
tight with Obama we don't have evidence
they were all that tight back then no we
don't and ultimately I don't think I
don't think it's just a question of the
relation for that particular person it's
what's your relationship to the parts of
the coalition that put Obama into office
and so obviously Biden has had very
strong support among African Americans
but people cannot dismiss that Bernie
has done very well if Latinos and with
younger people which are also
cornerstones of the Obama coalition so
that's why for Democrats to win all of
that is going to ultimately have to come
together because Bernie and Biden have
different parts of the Obama coalition
and that's got to get unified to win in
November
really interesting points as well and
you're speaking also about how do you
compete while showing some respect which
is a feature of most successful
primaries can I give a shout out to your
podcast Steve that would be great new
episode drop today new episode dropping
democracy in color with Steve Phillips
get it wherever you get your podcast
thank you sir thanks for having me on
hey I'm already Melbourne from MSNBC you
can see more of our videos right here or
better yet subscribe to our YouTube
channel below you could have been
anywhere in the world that you're here
with us and we appreciate that